I've always thought it'd be really cool if I could be an indie developer at home. Where I can work on my own projects and earn enough from it to sustain myself and a bit more for some savings. And I do have a good amount of ideas that are on my trello backlog. But whenever I think of trying to earn something from them, I get stumped at the question for payments.

In the modern technological landscape it is very cheap and easy to build the software, deploy it because most of this has been streamlined by really amazing startups around the world. But payments, especially domestic payments, is something of a problem at home because these large companies are never gonna give much attention to a country whose gdp is less than the companys valuation. So other than developing a home grown solution, there is no way around this.

And I sincerely applaud the RMA for spearheading mobile payments integration, building proper infrastructure for inter-bank transfers and a lot of the background work that goes un-noticed by end users. And I get why they haven't paid much attention to domestic payment gateways. Looking at the stats it is very easy to justify it. There were approximately 100,000 transactions on the domestic payment gateway where as mobile banking had ~140 million transactions. But I think there is huge potential and a lot of improvements to be made in the domestic payment gateway system.

Currently to access the RMA payment gateway we need to fill a 3 page form, which imo has a lot of unnecessary details. Get a statement from the bank indicating you have an account with them. Submit this form physically and then have the RMA IT team test your servers for 99% uptime. As to how they test 99% uptimes I am not sure and from what I've heard they just check if your website is online. So all of this fluff makes it inaccessible for small businesses and individuals.

If the only people that get access to these are already established companies, big startups, or well known businesses then it means there's a huge portion being left out of the eco system. I also have a lot of ideas that'd only be possible if there exists a proper payment gateway but currently its impossible for me to bring this idea to fruition since I know i am not going to get access to this.

Expanding on this, the RMA payment gateway currently does not have a sandbox environment where people can play around with the payments system. I think a sandbox would allow people to test their ideas, to make sure its actually workable and to have a MVP to validate their ideas. But currently I dont really know how it even works because access to the APIs are only granted after authorization.

Streamlining the access to the payment gateway would also be very nice ya. How am I supposed to submit the form physically from a different time zone. Automating the process of checking for an account would also be really nice. I think this would be easier to coordinate than trying to get paypal to set up a payments system in Bhutan.

For this article I also talked to some people who have used the API and the gateway. Unfortunately I can't comment on this from first hand experience because it is so hard to get access to it. They've told me that it is very cumbersome, the clunky website the RMA redirects to is very limited since once the user leaves for another website you really can't do much. And from there you just have to trust RMA to maintain a good user experience which I doubt. 

Having a better and more accessible payments system would allow small businesses to thrive. Small businesses have found roundabout methods of facilitating payments, most usually involving screenshots and journal numbers. But I think this isn't the smoothest experience both for the owner and the customer experience. Users have to wait until their transactions are manually confirmed by business owners, and business owners have to take time out of their schedule to verify these transactions. And this mostly just adds friction to their business.


